"Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana" (AB-PMJAY)

The flagship scheme of Hon'ble Prime Minister of India was launched in the State of Goa on 23rd September 2018, along with National launch.

Objective of the Scheme:
The objective of AB-PMJAY is to reduce catastrophic health expenditure, improve access to quality health care, reduce unmet needs and reduce out of pocket healthcare expenditures of poor and vulnerable families of the Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 database of the State/UT along with the estimated existing RSBY Beneficiary Families not figuring in the SECC database.

Salient features of the scheme:
a. AB-PMJAY is the world's largest health insurance/assurance scheme fully financed by the government.
b. It provides a cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization across public and private empanelled hospitals in India.
c. PM-JAY has defined 1,650 medical packages in Goa.
d. Over 10.74 crore poor and vulnerable entitled families (approximately 50 crore beneficiaries) are eligible for these benefits.
e. PM-JAY provides cashless access to health care services for the beneficiary at the point of service, that is, the hospital.
f. There is no restriction on the family size, age or gender.
g. Benefits of the scheme are portable across the country i.e. a beneficiary can visit any empanelled public or private hospital in India to avail cashless treatment.

Eligibility Criteria:
The households included are based on the deprivation and occupational criteria of Socio-Economic Caste Census 2011 (SECC 2011) for rural and urban areas respectively. It also includes families that were covered in RSBY but are not present in the SECC 2011 database. Any individual can check his/her eligibility under AB-PMJAY scheme by visiting the website i.e. mera.pmjay.gov.in or www.pmjay.gov.in.

Requirement of Documents to avail the scheme:
a. Ration Card/PMO letters - Mandatory
Any one document mentioned below:
b. Aadhaar card
c. Adoption Certificate
d. Birth Certificate
e. Certificate of Identity having photo issued by Gazetted Officer or Tehsildar on letterhead
f. Disability ID Card/handicapped medical certificate
g. Driving License
h. Freedom Fighter Photo Card
i. Kissan Photo ID
j. Passbook
k. Marriage Certificate issued by the Government issued by the respective State/UT Government/Administration
l. MNREGA Job Card
m. Other Government id with Photograph
n. PAN Card
o. Passport
p. Pensioner Photo Card
q. Voter ID Card

Mode or Procedure to avail the benefit of the Scheme:
Visit PMJAY Kendra set up by Goa Electronics Limited or any empanelled public or private hospital with mandatory documents (Ration Card/PMO letter and Aadhaar/Voter ID/ID proof) for cashless treatment.

Officer to be contacted:
Designation: Operations Manager / Medical Management & Quality Manager
Address: Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana cell, Ground floor, Directorate of Health Services, Campal, Panaji.
Phone No.: 0832-2225540
Email: pmjaygoa@gmail.com
Website: https://www.pmjay.gov.in/

Details of Office where the application to be submitted:
PMJAY Kendra's set up by Goa electronics limited and at all public & private pmjay empanelled hospitals.
